# sql_healthcare_p2

## Project Overview

**Project Title**: Healthcare Data Analysis
**Level**: Beginner

This project is designed to showcase SQL skills and techniques used by data analysts in the healthcare sector. It covers setting up a healthcare database, performing data cleaning, exploratory data analysis (EDA), and addressing healthcare-related business questions with SQL queries. This project is ideal for those starting in data analysis and wanting to gain SQL expertise in a healthcare setting.

## Objectives

1. **Set Up a Healthcare Database**: Create and populate a healthcare database with the provided data on patients, treatments, healthcare providers, and outcomes.
2. **Data Cleaning**: Identify and clean any records with missing or null values to ensure data accuracy and reliability.
3 **Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)**: Perform basic EDA to understand the dataset, including distribution and relationships among variables.
4.**Healthcare Analysis**: Use SQL to answer key business questions related to healthcare, patient demographics, treatment effectiveness, and hospital performance.

## Project Structure

### Data Analysis and Findings

The following SQL queries were developed to answer specific business questions:

1. **Retrieve the names of all patients in the database.** 
'''sql
select Name from healthcare;
'''

2. **List the unique medical conditions present in the dataset.**
'''sql
select distinct(Medical_Condition) from healthcare;
'''

3. **Find the total number of doctors in the healthcare system.**
'''sql
select count(distinct(doctor)) from healthcare;
'''

4. **Retrieve the details of all female patients.**
'''sql
select * from healthcare where gender='female';
'''

5. **what is the average age of patients in the database.**
'''sql
select avg(age) from healthcare;
'''

6. **Identify the patients who have more than one medical condition.**
'''sql
select name,count(medical_condition) from healthcare group by name having count(medical_condition)>1;
'''

7. **List the names of all doctors.** 
'''sql
select doctor from healthcare;
'''

8.**Identify the most common medical condition among patients.**
'''sql
select medical_condition,count(medical_condition) from healthcare group by medical_condition order by count(medical_condition) desc limit 1;
'''

9.**Find the patients who are older than 60 years and have diabetes.** 
'''sql
select * from healthcare where age>60 and medical_condition='diabetes';
'''

10.**Calculate the total revenue generated by the healthcare system.**
'''sql
select sum(billing_amount) from healthcare;
'''

11.**ind the doctor with the oldest patient.**
'''sql
select doctor,name,age from healthcare order by age desc limit 1;
'''

12.**Calculate the average duration of medical visits.**
'''sql
select avg(duration) from healthcare;
'''

13.**Give the names of patients whose name starts with A.**
'''sql
select name from healthcare where name like 'a%';
'''

14.**How many male and female patients are there in dataset.**
'''sql
select gender,count(gender) from healthcare group by gender;
'''

15.**how many patients are normal.**
'''sql
select count(*) from healthcare where test_results='normal';
'''

16.**how many patients are abnormal or Inconclusive.**
'''sql
select count(*) from healthcare where test_results in ('abnormal','inconclusive');
'''

17.**how many patients of blood group AB+ are there of age above 52.**
'''sql
select count(*) from healthcare where blood_type='ab+' and age>52;
'''

18. **how many patients have paid the bill above 24890.**
'''sql
select count(*) from healthcare where billing_amount>24890;
'''

19. **what are the names of patients having Asthma.**
'''sql
select name,medical_condition from healthcare where medical_condition='asthma';
'''

20. **how many patients have cance**
'''sql
select count(*) from healthcare where medical_condition='cancer';
'''

21. **what are the names and blood groups of patients admitted to room no. 292.** 
'''sql
select name,blood_type from healthcare where room_number=292;
'''

22. **how many males have Arthritis.**
'''sql
select count(*) from healthcare where gender='male' and medical_condition='arthritis';
'''

23. **How many patients were admitted to Harris and Sons hospital.**
'''sql
select count(*) from healthcare where hospital='Harris and Sons';
'''

24. **what are the names of patients whose Insurance Provider are Cigna.**
'''sql
select name,insurance_provider from healthcare where insurance_provider='cigna';
'''

25. **Name the Medical Condition having patients whose ages is greater than average age.**
'''sql
select name,medical_condition,age from healthcare
where age>(select avg(age) from healthcare);
'''

## Findings
Findings
1.**Patient Demographics**: Analysis of the patient population by age, gender, and region, helping identify the primary demographics receiving healthcare services.
2.**Treatment Efficacy**:Identification of treatments with the highest success rates and any correlations between patient demographics and treatment outcomes.
3.**Hospital Performance**:Monthly analysis of hospital admissions and discharges reveals peak times for healthcare services, aiding in resource planning.
4.**Patient Insights**:Identification of top-spending patients, common ailments treated, and frequently used healthcare services.

## Conclusion
This project provides a well-rounded introduction to SQL for data analysts, covering database setup, data cleaning, EDA, and healthcare-focused SQL queries. The findings can assist healthcare providers in making data-driven decisions by understanding patient demographics, treatment outcomes, and healthcare trends.

## How to Use
1.**Clone the Repository**: Clone this project repository from GitHub.
2.**Set Up the Database**: Run the SQL scripts provided in the database_setup.sql file to create and populate the database.
3.**Run the Queries**: Use the SQL queries provided in the analysis_queries.sql file to perform your analysis.
4.**Explore and Modify**: Feel free to modify the queries to explore different aspects of the dataset or answer additional business questions.

## Author - Meet Limbani
This project is part of my portfolio, showcasing the SQL skills essential for data analyst roles. If you have any questions, feedback, or would like to collaborate, feel free to get in touch!

### Stay Updated and Join the Community
For more content on SQL, data analysis, and other data-related topics, make sure to follow me on social media and join our community:

- **LinkedIn**: [Connect with me professionally](www.linkedin.com/in/meet-limbani-6258bb285)

Thank you for your support, and I look forward to connecting with you!
